Welcome back to the course, in this lecture we
will have a practice problem before we move to
the next chapter. We have an out-tree, a start
node, and an integer k. We want to find values of
nodes that are at a distance of k from that start
node, knowing that one unit of distance is a move
from the node to a child or to its parent. For
example if we have this tree, the start node is B,
and k is 3, nodes that are at a distance of k are
these ones, the output should be G H I J P Q R.
For H for example, it's included in the output
because there is a distance of 3 from B to H,
we go from B to A, then from
A to D, then from D to H.
How to solve this problem? Here we're dealing
with distance between vertices, we want to find
vertices of distance k. And when we talk about
distance, by distance we mean the number of
edges between the two vertices, we should directly
think of breadth-first search algorithm. Because
BFS traverses the structure level by level and
can find the shortest path between two vertices.
Here we don't care about the shortest path because
we're dealing with a tree, there is exactly one
path between each two nodes, so it's obviously
the shortest one. But, we want nodes that are
at a distance of k from the source node, in other
terms, we're searching for nodes of the level k.
However, even though the out-tree is a graph,
it's not represented with an adjacency list
or adjacency matrix as usual, it's represented
with Node objects, and we're given the root only,
knowing that the root is not necessarily
the start node we want to start from.
Also, from a node, we have access to
its children only, not its parent,
which is an issue because additional valid
nodes can be found when going from the parent.
What's the solution then? Well, we can
think of converting this tree to a graph
with adjacency list representation for example,
and apply breadth-first search as we learnt.
But, we don't even need to convert, remember
that to work with a graph, we just need to be
able to go from a vertex to its neighbors.
Is it possible here? Let's see. In a tree,
the neighbors of a node are its children, and its
parent, are we able to go to them? For children,
yes, we have the children references array stored
in the object. But for the parent, no. No worries,
we can still create a hash table where the key is
a node, and the value is its parent. We fill it,
and we apply bfs, we can even apply dfs if
we want by the way, but let's stick with bfs.
How to fill the parents hash table? For that,
we just apply bfs starting from the root while
with the actual node, for each neighbor, we set
node as the parent of neighbor. After filling the
hash table, we can now apply bfs again, from
the start node this time, to go to children
we use children array, and to move to parent
we use parent map, and we solved the problem.
Recap before moving to code, we have an
out-tree, represented with Node objects,
a node object contains its value and the array of
its children, we have a start node, an integer k,
and we want to find all nodes that are at
a distance of k from that specific node,
knowing that one unit of distance is
a move to a child or to the parent.
To solve this problem, we can apply breadth-first
search from the start node to find nodes of the
level k. However, to be able to move from
a node to all its neighbors, we also need
a reference to the parent, which we don't. For
that, we create a hash table and we apply bfs,
or dfs, to fill it, for each node, for each
neighbor, we set node as the parent of neighbor.
Last step, we apply bfs but from the specific
node this time, while keeping track of the level
of nodes. When dequeuing, if the level of the
actual node is k, we add its value to the output.
Let's implement this. We first have a function
get_parent_map, we start by creating a hash table,
and we know that the root has no parent so we put
null. Now we launch bfs starting from the root,
we create a queue, we put root in
it, and while the queue is not empty,
we dequeue a node, and we traverse its
neighbors, in other words, its children.
Note that we're traversing the tree from top
to bottom, so we don't go back to parent,
this is why neighbors are the children
and we don't need a visited set because
we're not going back to the same node. For each
child of the node, we set node as the parent of
child in the hash table. Also, we add the
child to the queue for next iterations.
We finished filling the parent map, we return
it as a result of the call in the distance_k
function. We move to the second part of the
algorithm, launching bfs from the target node.
First we create an array output where we
will put values we're searching for. We
also create a queue and put the target
in it because we will start from there.
We want to also keep track of the level,
this is why we store a tuple (node, level),
here the tuple (target, 0), because
the level of the initial node is 0.
And we also need a visited set because we will
move to the parent this time, so it's possible
to move to the same node multiple times this
time, this is why we use visited set to avoid it.
Initially we set the initial node as visited,
the start node. We can start, while the queue
isn't empty, we dequeue a tuple from the queue,
we put values into two variables node and level.
Now if the level of the actual node is k, it's one
of the nodes we're searching for, we add its value
to the output. Then, we traverse neighbors, but
what are neighbors of the actual node? Neighbors
of a node are its children, and its parent, so
we create an array neighbors that contains its
children + the parent that we extract from the
hash map we made. Now for each neighbor, we need
3 conditions to add it to the queue. First, its
level should be less than k, because once we reach
the level k, we don't need to continue further.
Second condition, the node should not be null,
it should exist, because for example when we
enqueue the root's parent we get a null value,
we shouldn't work with it. And last condition
obviously, the node should not be visited.
If these conditions are respected, we set the
node as visited and we enqueue it with level+1
because it belongs to the next level, classic
bfs. After the loop, we just return the output,
it contains values of nodes at a distance of k
from target. And we've implemented the solution.
For the time complexity, we're just applying bfs
twice, we get an an O(|V|+|E|) time complexity.
And in a tree, the number of edges is the
number of vertices minus one, |E| is |V|-1.
By replacing, we get an O(|V|) time complexity,
where |V| is the number of nodes in the tree.
By the way, this problem is similar
to the leetcode problem number 863,
the only difference is that in leetcode the
given tree is a binary tree, defined with a
left and right children, while here we worked
with a tree that can have more than 2 children,
defined with an array of children. We've reached
the end of this lecture, now we need to start
talking about spanning trees and minimum
spanning trees, see you in the next lecture!